---
layout: post
title:  "You Were the Smart Kid. So Why Do You Feel So Lost Now"
date:   2025-03-30 22:38 +0200
categories: Growth YouTube links
---

["You Were the Smart Kid. So Why Do You Feel So Lost Now (YouTube)"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U4PsIm9dDvs)

in today's episode of the let's talk
psychology podcast we're going to talk
about why smart kids end up lonely and
struggle as adults this audio recording
includes subtitles so you can follow
along more intentionally and absorb the
ideas at your own pace why is it that so
many smart kids grow up feeling stuck
disconnected and completely alone they
were supposed to be ahead of everyone
else they were praised rewarded told
they'd go far and yet somewhere along
the way that promise turned into pre
that praise became a prison and now a
lot of those same kids the ones who once
stood out are struggling as adults they
can't find motivation they feel socially
behind they struggle to start things
follow through or connect with people
and worst of all they can't explain why
because on the outside everything looks
fine they're still sharp still capable
but inside there's this constant sense
of isolation like life is happening to
other people and they're just watching
it go by and it turns out there's a
reason for that smart kids often build
their entire identity around being smart
and when that happens the very thing
that made them feel special as children
becomes the exact thing that traps them
as adults so let's talk about why this
happens and more importantly how to undo
it because none of this is about failure
it's about a survival strategy that
stopped working and if you understand
how you got here you can start to find a
way out so When We're Young our identity
tends to be simple kids latch on to one
or two traits and build their sense of
self around them for example a kid might
base his identity as a person who likes
Pokemon or chicken nuggets it's all very
one-dimensional but that's normal that's
how identity starts it's straightforward
and it's based on interests or labels
and one of the most powerful labels a
child can receive is you're smart that
phrase sticks it gets reinforced by
teachers parents classmates it becomes a
core part of how you see yourself and
for a while it feels amazing being smart
as a kid gives you praise attention and
you basically live life on easy mode you
don't need to study as hard as everyone
else you pick things up quickly and you
stand out compared to the other kids but
here's the hidden cost when you get
praised for being smart what people are
usually praising is not hard work it's
effortless success you were praised when
you solved the problem quickly when you
got an A without trying when you
understood something the first time and
over time you start to internalize a
very dangerous idea if I'm smart things
should be easy for me and that belief
will quietly sabotage everything once
you grow older because the moment
something isn't easy when you struggle
when you fail when you don't understand
something right away it doesn't feel
like a normal challenge it feels like a
threat to your identity because you tell
yourself if I'm supposed to be smart
smart then why am I struggling so
instead of Leaning into difficulty you
start avoiding it you don't raise your
hand unless you're sure you don't play
games unless you know you'll win you
don't pursue things you could love
because they might expose you as someone
who maybe isn't so smart and slowly your
life starts to narrow you only do what
you're already good at you stick to
familiar territory you protect your
image and your identity of the perfect
smart kid instead of trying new things
and that's the crap because while
everyone else is out there experimenting
trying failing developing you're locked
inside a shrinking comfort zone and the
longer that goes on the harder it
becomes to leave and at some point you
realize you've built a whole identity on
something that now feels fragile you
can't afford to fail you can't afford to
look stupid you can't afford to threaten
what you built your whole identity on so
you stall
and that's when the isolation starts to
set in because when you stop growing you
also stop connecting think about it
connection comes from shared activities
being on a team going through awkward
stages together or working hard towards
something and if you start opting out of
those things if you remove yourself from
the situations where other people Bond
you miss the moments that create real
friendships and connection you don't
join the club because you're afraid
you'll be bad at it you don't try the
sport because it's unfamiliar
you avoid group projects because they
frustrate you and without realizing it
you start stepping out of the flow of
social life but you still crave
connection right so what do you do you
lean on what you know your intelligence
you try to understand people instead of
relating to them you analyze You observe
you run simulations in your head and
this leads to something called cognitive
empathy where you can understand what
others feel logically but you don't
emotionally engage with them and it
works up to a point you can navigate
conversations you can keep up socially
you might even seem charismatic on the
surface but underneath you're exhausted
because instead of just being with
people you're calculating you're
constantly thinking about what to say
how to respond what they might be
thinking so now socializing also becomes
something you have to be good at and to
avoid failing at it you start avoiding
it this is where the loneliness deepens
but you're smart right you should be
able to figure this out so you start
applying logic to emotional problems you
try to fix your self-esteem with
rationality you write out arguments to
convince yourself you're fine you
analyze your own behavior to death and
none of it helps because intelligence
wasn't designed to fix emotional pain
it's not a tool for selfworth it's a
tool for solving external problems and
when you try to use it to feel okay
inside it just keeps looping because
there's no intellectual answer to the
question am I enough that question can
only be answered emotionally and for
smart kids emotional growth is often the
one thing that got left behind and when
the emotional pain becomes too sharp
when the loneliness starts to feel
unbearable that's when the ego steps in
and forms one final defense you tell
yourself I'm just different from other
people I don't relate because they're
not as smart I'm too deep for surface
level friendships and now instead of
admitting that you're lonely you
convince yourself that you're above
everyone else not because you actually
believe it but because it hurts less
than admitting you feel left out this is
what we call defensive arrogance and
it's one of the most isolating patterns
you can fall into it creates a wall
between you and everyone else and even
when you want connection the wall
doesn't let you reach for it because
connection requires humility it requires
presence it requires being seen and
vulnerable so how do we fix this the
first step and this is non-negotiable is
that you have to stop identifying as the
smart kid you have to let that identity
go not because being intelligent is bad
but because basing your self-worth on it
is toxic when your value is tied to how
easily you succeed you will do
everything in your power to avoid effort
avoid failure and avoid situations that
might prove you're not exceptional
you'll sabotage progress just to protect
protect the illusion and eventually that
illusion will collapse so the fix is to
build a new identity not around being
smart but around being willing to grow
you stop asking what will make me look
intelligent and you start asking what
will help me move forward you stop
protecting your pride and start
embracing discomfort you let yourself
try things and be bad at them you start
showing up not to win but to participate
and yeah it's awkward it's uncomfortable
it feels like a step backward but it's
not because it's the first real step
toward becoming whole the old identity
told you that your value came from being
special the new one reminds you that
your value comes from being human and
being human means you're allowed to be
uncertain you're allowed to grow slowly
you're allowed to feel lost you're
allowed to not know what the hell you're
doing half the time but the only way
forward is to take action anyway not
perfect action not clever action just
honest imperfect human steps forward so
if you're someone who feels stuck or
numb or chronically disconnected if
you've spent your whole life trying to
be the smartest person in the room and
now you don't know how to be anything
else this is where you begin you let go
of the story you stop trying to be
impressive you start trying to be real
because you don't need to be the
smartest person in the room to belong in
it you just need to be someone who's
willing to show up even when it's hard
even when it's messy even when it's
unfamiliar and if you can do that
if you can stop clinging to the version
of yourself that needs to be above it
all you'll start to feel something you
haven't felt in a long time connection
not because you earned it not because
you deserved it but because you were
finally willing to step down from the
pedestal and into the world where the
rest of the people live and it turns out
that world isn't so bad in fact it's the
only place where you can truly be seen
and more important
it's the only place where you can
finally feel at home so if any part of
this resonated with you if you recognize
yourself in these patterns or felt
something click that you haven't quite
been able to put into words before leave
a comment and let me know what stood out
chances are you're not the only one who
feels this way and sometimes naming the
pattern is the first real step to
breaking it thanks for listening to the
let's talk psychology podcast take care
of your mind and I'll see you in the
next episode
